DOCSP-43062: Databases and Collections (#23)
mongodb/docs-c: source/databases-collections.txt

.. _c-databases-collections:

=========================
Databases and Collections
=========================

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

.. facet::
   :name: genre
   :values: reference

.. meta::
   :keywords: table, row, organize, storage

Overview
--------

In this guide, you can learn how to interact with MongoDB databases and
collections with the {+driver-short+}.

MongoDB organizes data into a hierarchy of the following levels:

> - **Databases**: The top level of data organization in a MongoDB instance.
> - **Collections**: MongoDB stores documents in collections. They are analogous to tables in relational databases.
> - **Documents**: Contain literal data such as string, numbers, dates, and other embedded documents.

Reviewer: S: I think the definitions should have a parallel structure, i.e., each one starts with a noun/article/verb, each one is a complete sentence/sentence fragment. You could potentially reword to:
```suggestion
- **Databases**: Top-level data structures in a MongoDB instance that store collections.
- **Collections**: Groups of MongoDB documents. They are analogous to tables in relational databases.
- **Documents**: Units that store literal data such as string, numbers, dates, and other embedded documents.
```

> For more information about document field types and structure, see the

Reviewer: S: seems like this sentence applies to the last bullet point above. You could add it to the Documents definition, or add it as an admonition in that bullet point

:manual:`Documents </core/document/>` guide in the {+mdb-server+} manual.

Access a Database
-----------------

Access a database by using the ``mongoc_client_get_database()`` function and passing in
a ``mongo_client_t`` instance and the name of the database as parameters.

The following example accesses a database named ``"test_database"``:

> .. code-block:: c

Reviewer: S: could you move the code to a separate code file and use literalincludes (for AI ingestion / code testing)?

   mongoc_database_t *database = mongoc_client.get_database (
       client, "test_database");

Access a Collection
-------------------

Access a collection by using the ``mongoc_client_get_collection()`` or ``mongoc_database_get_collection()``

> functions.

Reviewer: S: since you mentioned the parameters of `mongoc_client_get_database() `in the previous section, I'd include the parameters for these functions too

Author: Good callout – I think I would prefer to make it consistent by removing references to the parameters in the first occurrence here. We link to the API documentation, after all.

Reviewer: I do think it's helpful to include the parameters, but up to you!

Reviewer: I do think it's helpful to mention the parameters, but up to you!

The following example accesses a collection named ``"test_collection"`` by using the 
``mongoc_database_get_collection()`` function:

.. code-block:: c

   mongoc_collection_t *collection = mongoc_database_get_collection (
       database, "test_collection");

.. tip::

   If the provided collection name does not already exist in the database,
   MongoDB implicitly creates the collection when you first insert data
   into it.

Create a Collection
-------------------

Use the ``mongoc_database_create_collection()`` function to explicitly create a collection in a

> MongoDB database.

Reviewer: S: same suggestion here about including the parameters

The following example creates a collection called ``"example_collection"``:

.. code-block:: c

   bson_error_t error;
   mongoc_collection_t *collection = mongoc_database_create_collection (
       database, "example_collection", NULL, &error);

You can specify collection options, such as maximum size and document

> validation rules, by passing them inside a ``bson_t`` structure. For a full list of

Reviewer: S: specify how to pass `bson_t`
```suggestion
validation rules, by passing them inside a ``bson_t`` structure as the third parameter to the mongoc_database_create_collection() function. For a full list of
```

optional parameters, see the :manual:`create documentation </reference/command/create>`
in the {+mdb-server+} manual.

Get a List of Collections
-------------------------

You can query for a list of collections in a database by calling the
``mongoc_database_find_collections_with_opts()`` function. The function returns a cursor containing all
collections in the database and their associated metadata.

The following example calls the ``mongoc_database_find_collections_with_opts()`` function and iterates over
the cursor to print the results:

> .. code-block:: c

Reviewer: S: since you're printing cursor results in the code, I think it makes sense to include code output for this example. Maybe you could pass the "test_database" database and print the two collections used on this page (test_collection, example_collection)?

   char *str;
   const bson_t *doc;

   cursor = mongoc_database_find_collections_with_opts (database, NULL, NULL);
   
   while (mongoc_cursor_next (cursor, &doc)) {
        str = bson_as_canonical_extended_json(doc, NULL);
        printf("Collection: %s\n", str);
        bson_free(str);
    }

To query for only the names of the collections in the database, call the
``mongoc_database_get_collection_names_with_opts()`` function as follows:

.. code-block:: c

   char **strv;
   bson_error_t error;
   unsigned i;

   if ((strv = mongoc_database_get_collection_names_with_opts (database, NULL, &error))) {
     for (i = 0; strv[i]; i++)
       printf ("%s\n", strv[i]);

     bson_strfreev (strv);
   } else {
     fprintf (sterr, "Command failed: %s\n", error.message);
   }

.. TODO: Uncomment when cursors page is created
.. For more information about iterating over a cursor, see :ref:`c-cursors`. 

Delete a Collection
-------------------

You can delete a collection from the database by using the ``mongoc_collection_drop()``
function.

> The following example deletes the ``test_collection`` collection:

Reviewer: S: Since the collection has quotes in the example:

```suggestion
The following example deletes the ``"test_collection"`` collection:
```

.. code-block:: c

   mongoc_collection_t *collection = mongoc_database_get_collection (database, "test_collection");
   monogc_collection_drop (collection, NULL);

.. warning:: Dropping a Collection Deletes All Data in the Collection

   Dropping a collection from your database permanently deletes all
   documents and all indexes within that collection.

   Drop a collection only if the data in it is no longer needed.

.. _c-config-read-write:

Configure Read and Write Operations
-----------------------------------

You can control how the driver routes read operations by setting a **read preference**.
You can also control options for how the driver waits for acknowledgment of
read and write operations on a replica set by setting a **read concern** and a
**write concern**.

By default, databases inherit these settings from the ``mongoc_client_t`` instance,
and collections inherit them from the database. However, you can change these
settings on your database or collection by using one of the following functions:

> 

Reviewer: S: I think the bullet points can be formatted more clearly, since having each method in a comma-separated list makes them a little hard to read.

You could reword to "However, you can change these settings on your database by using one of the following functions:" with a list of database functions. Then, "You can change the read and write settings on your collections by using one of the following functions" and add a list of collection functions.

- For ``mongoc_database_t`` instances, use the ``mongoc_database_set_read_prefs()``, 
  ``mongoc_database_set_read_concern()``, and ``mongoc_database_set_write_concern()`` functions
  to set the read preferences, read concern, and write concern for the database.
- For ``mongoc_collection_t`` instances, use the use the ``mongoc_collection_set_read_prefs()``, 
  ``mongoc_collection_set_read_concern()``, and ``mongoc_collection_set_write_concern()`` functions
  to set the read preferences, read concern, and write concern for the collection.

> 

Reviewer: S: instead of including three code examples that set collection settings, I think having one example that sets database settings and one that sets collection settings makes more sense. If you break up the list above, as mentioned in my last suggestion, you could add the database example after the list of database functions and same thing with collection

.. code-block:: c

   mongoc_write_concern_t *write_concern = mongoc_write_concern_new ();
   mongoc_write_concern_set_w(write_concern, MONGOC_WRITE_CONCERN_W_MAJORITY);
   mongoc_collection_set_write_concern(collection, write_concern);

.. tip::

   To see the types of available read preferences, see the
   `API documentation <{+api-libmongoc+}/mongoc_read_prefs_t.html#read-modes>`__. 

To learn more about the read and write settings, see the following guides in the
{+mdb-server+} manual:

- :manual:`Read Preference </core/read-preference/>`
- :manual:`Read Concern </reference/read-concern/>`
- :manual:`Write Concern </reference/write-concern/>`

Tag Sets
~~~~~~~~

In the {+mdb-server+}, you can apply key-value :manual:`tags
</core/read-preference-tags/>` to replica-set
members according to any criteria you choose. You can then use
those tags to target one or more members for a read operation.

By default, the {+driver-short+} ignores tags
when choosing a member to read from. To instruct the {+driver-short+}
to prefer certain tags, use the ``mongoc_read_prefs_set_tags()`` function to set the
tags in an instance of ``mongoc_read_prefs_t``. 

> In the following code example, the tag set passed to the ``mongoc_read_prefs_t`` instance

Reviewer: I: seems like this is a more accurate description of the code:
```suggestion
In the following code example, the tag set passed to the ``mongoc_read_prefs_set_tags()`` function
```

instructs the {+driver-short+} to prefer reads from the
New York data center (``'dc': 'ny'``) and to fall back to the San Francisco data
center (``'dc': 'sf'``):

.. code-block:: c

   mongoc_read_prefs_t *read_prefs = mongoc_read_prefs_new (MONGOC_READ_SECONDARY_PREFERRED);
   bson_t *tags = BCON_NEW ("DC", BCON_UTF8("ny"), "DC", BCON_UTF8("sf"));

   mongoc_read_prefs_set_tags (read_prefs, tags);

Local Threshold
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If multiple replica-set members match the read preference and tag sets you specify,
the {+driver-short+} reads from the nearest replica-set members, chosen according to
their ping time.

By default, the driver uses only those members whose ping times are within 15 milliseconds
of the nearest member for queries. To distribute reads between members with
higher latencies, include the ``localThresholdMS`` parameter in your connection string URI.

The following example connects to a MongoDB deployment running on ``localhost:27017``

> and specifies a local threshold of 35 milliseconds:

Reviewer: I: the code sets the local threshold to 100 milliseconds instead of 35

Author: Good catch

.. code-block:: c

   const char *uri_string = "mongodb://localhost:27017/?localThresholdMS=100";
   mongoc_client_t *client = mongoc_client_new (uri_string);

> In the preceding example, {+driver-short+} distributes reads between matching members

Reviewer: S: add "the"
```suggestion
In the preceding example, the {+driver-short+} distributes reads between matching members
```

functions.

The following example accesses a collection named ``"test_collection"`` by using the 
``mongoc_database_get_collection()`` function:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/databases-collections/databases-collections.c
   :start-after: start-access-collection
   :end-before: end-access-collection
   :language: c
   :copyable:
   :dedent:

.. tip::

   If the provided collection name does not already exist in the database,
   MongoDB implicitly creates the collection when you first insert data
   into it.

Create a Collection
-------------------

Use the ``mongoc_database_create_collection()`` function to explicitly create a collection in a
MongoDB database.

The following example creates a collection called ``"example_collection"``:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/databases-collections/databases-collections.c
   :start-after: start-create-collection
   :end-before: end-create-collection
   :language: c
   :copyable:
   :dedent:

You can specify collection options, such as maximum size and document
validation rules, by passing them inside a ``bson_t`` structure as the third parameter
to the ``mongoc_database_create_collection()`` function. For a full list of

> optional parameters, see the :manual:`create documentation </reference/command/create>`

Reviewer: S: for a little more clarity about the linked page

```suggestion
optional parameters, see the :manual:`create command </reference/command/create>` documentation
```

in the {+mdb-server+} manual.

Get a List of Collections
-------------------------

You can query for a list of collections in a database by calling the
``mongoc_database_find_collections_with_opts()`` function. The function returns a cursor containing all
collections in the database and their associated metadata.

The following example calls the ``mongoc_database_find_collections_with_opts()`` function and iterates over
the cursor to print the results:

> .. io-code-block::
> 

Reviewer: S:
```suggestion
.. io-code-block::
   :copyable:
```

   .. input:: /includes/databases-collections/databases-collections.c
      :language: c:
      :start-after: start-find-collections
      :end-before: end-find-collections
      :dedent:

   .. output::

>       :language: console
> 

Reviewer: S: we usually make it not visible so users have to click "show output"

```suggestion
      :language: console
      :visible: false

```

Reviewer: same code block suggestions apply below

``mongoc_database_set_read_prefs()`` function:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/databases-collections/databases-collections.c
   :start-after: start-database-read-prefs
   :end-before: end-database-read-prefs
   :language: c
   :copyable:
   :dedent:

You can change the read and write settings on your collections by using one of the following functions:

- ``mongoc_collection_set_read_prefs()``
- ``mongoc_collection_set_read_concern()``
- ``mongoc_collection_set_write_concern()``

The following example shows how to change the read preference of a collection by using the
``mongoc_collection_set_read_prefs()`` function:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/databases-collections/databases-collections.c
   :start-after: start-collection-read-prefs
   :end-before: end-collection-read-prefs
   :language: c
   :copyable:
   :dedent:

.. tip::

   To see the types of available read preferences, see the
   `API documentation <{+api-libmongoc+}/mongoc_read_prefs_t.html#read-modes>`__. 

To learn more about the read and write settings, see the following guides in the
{+mdb-server+} manual:

- :manual:`Read Preference </core/read-preference/>`
- :manual:`Read Concern </reference/read-concern/>`

> - :manual:`Write Concern </reference/write-concern/>`

Reviewer: S: since these lines also provide additional resources, you could move to the same tip admonition as above (with a newline between the API doc link and the manual links)
